# HP 530

## Contents

*   [1 Wireless](#Wireless)
*   [2 CPU Frequency Scaling](#CPU_Frequency_Scaling)
*   [3 Sound and Headphones](#Sound_and_Headphones)
*   [4 To Do](#To_Do)

### Wireless

See [Wireless network configuration#iwlegacy](/index.php/Wireless_network_configuration#iwlegacy "Wireless network configuration").

### CPU Frequency Scaling

See the main [CPU frequency scaling](/index.php/CPU_frequency_scaling "CPU frequency scaling") article.

### Sound and Headphones

If the speakers are not muted when headphones are plugged in, add this line to `/etc/modprobe.d/modprobe.conf`:

```
options snd-hda-intel model=laptop

```

## To Do

There are still a few things I'd like to get working at some point so if anyone is reading this and has any suggestions I'd love to hear them. :-) Most are pretty low priority/eye candy type stuff.

*   I'd like to have something like MacBooks where they "gradually" dim when idle as opposed to "entirely on" and "entirely off". I think that would come in handy when I just have my notebook open as a reference or something where I could still read it but not need it sitting there sucking my battery dry at full illumination.

```
 xbacklight -set 30 -time 60000  <--dim over a minute

```

*   Anything to extend battery life. I haven't really looked into it but I'd like to find a way to scale the core voltage as well as frequency. I've seen Intel utilities that can do that on Windows desktops but nothing so far for Linux
*   A way to kill the wireless card in software. This notebook comes with a button right by the power button to kill the wireless. It's not a big deal to hit the button I guess but it would be pretty neat if there was a way to simulate hitting the button in case I forget or I lose wireless connection for extended periods. I'm not even sure if this is possible or how it could be done, though.

Retrieved from "[https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php?title=HP_530&oldid=399594](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php?title=HP_530&oldid=399594)"