**fish** (the **friendly interactive shell**) is a user friendly command line shell intended mostly for interactive use.

## Contents

*   [1 Installation](#Installation)
*   [2 Input/output](#Input.2Foutput)
    *   [2.1 File descriptors](#File_descriptors)
    *   [2.2 Redirection](#Redirection)
    *   [2.3 Piping](#Piping)
*   [3 Configuration](#Configuration)
    *   [3.1 Web interface](#Web_interface)
    *   [3.2 Command completion](#Command_completion)
    *   [3.3 /etc/profile and ~/.profile compatibility](#.2Fetc.2Fprofile_and_.7E.2F.profile_compatibility)
*   [4 Tips and Tricks](#Tips_and_Tricks)
    *   [4.1 History substitution](#History_substitution)
    *   [4.2 Disabling greeting message](#Disabling_greeting_message)
    *   [4.3 Not setting fish as default shell](#Not_setting_fish_as_default_shell)
        *   [4.3.1 Modify .bashrc to drop into fish](#Modify_.bashrc_to_drop_into_fish)
        *   [4.3.2 Use terminal emulator options](#Use_terminal_emulator_options)
        *   [4.3.3 Use terminal multiplexer options](#Use_terminal_multiplexer_options)
        *   [4.3.4 Working with fish as default shell](#Working_with_fish_as_default_shell)
    *   [4.4 su launching Bash](#su_launching_Bash)
    *   [4.5 Start X at login](#Start_X_at_login)
    *   [4.6 Liquidprompt](#Liquidprompt)
    *   [4.7 Git status in prompt](#Git_status_in_prompt)
    *   [4.8 Evaluating ssh-agent](#Evaluating_ssh-agent)
*   [5 See also](#See_also)

## Installation

[Install](/index.php/Install "Install") the [fish](https://www.archlinux.org/packages/?name=fish) package. Alternatively install the [fish-git](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/fish-git/) package for the development version.

To make fish the default shell, see [Shell#Changing your default shell](/index.php/Shell#Changing_your_default_shell "Shell"); however, you should consider [#Not setting fish as default shell](#Not_setting_fish_as_default_shell).

## Input/output

### File descriptors

Like other shells, fish lets you redirect input/output streams. This is useful when using text files to save programs output or errors, or when using text files as input. Most programs use three input/output streams, represented by numbers called file descriptors (FD). These are:

*   Standard input (FD 0), used for reading (keyboard by default).
*   Standard output (FD 1), used for writing (screen by default).
*   Standard error (FD 2), used for displaying errors and warnings (screen by default).

### Redirection

Any file descriptor can be directed to other files through a mechanism called redirection:

```
*Redirecting standard input:*
$ command < source_file

*Redirecting standard output:*
$ command > destination

*Appending standard output to an existing file:*
$ command >> destination

*Redirecting standard error:*
$ command ^ destination

*Appending standard error to an existing file:*
$ command ^^ destination
```

You can use one of the following as `destination`:

*   A filename (the output will be written to the specified file).
*   An `&` followed by the number of another file descriptor. The output will be written to the other file descriptor.
*   An `&` followed by a `-` sign. The output will not be written anywhere.

Examples:

```
*Redirecting standard output to a file:*
$ command > destination_file.txt

*Redirecting both standard output and standard error to the same file:*
$ command > destination_file.txt ^ &1

*Silencing standard output:*
$ command > &-
```

### Piping

You can redirect standard output of one command to standard input of the next command. This is done by separating the commands by the pipe character (`|`). Example:

```
cat example.txt | head

```

You can redirect other file descriptors to the pipe (besides standard output). The next example shows how to use standard error of one command as standard input of another command, prepending standard error file descriptor's number and `>` to the pipe:

```
$ command 2>| less

```

This will run `command` and redirect its standard error to the `less` command.

## Configuration

User configurations for fish are located at `~/.config/fish/config.fish`. Adding commands or functions to the file will execute/define them when opening a terminal, similar to `.bashrc`.

### Web interface

The fish prompt and terminal colors can be set with the interactive web interface:

```
fish_config

```

Selected settings are written to your personal configuration file. You can also view defined functions and your history.

### Command completion

fish can generate autocompletions from man pages. Completions are written to `~/.config/fish/generated_completions/` and can be generated by calling:

```
fish_update_completions

```

You can also define your own completions in `~/.config/fish/completions/`. See `/usr/share/fish/completions/` for a few examples.

Context-aware completions for Arch Linux-specific commands like *pacman*, *pacman-key*, *makepkg*, *cower*, *pbget*, *pacmatic* are built into fish, since the policy of the fish development is to include all the existent completions in the upstream tarball. The memory management is clever enough to avoid any negative impact on resources.

### /etc/profile and ~/.profile compatibility

Since standard POSIX `sh` syntax is not compatible with fish, fish will not be able to source `/etc/profile` and thus all `*.sh` in `/etc/profile.d`) and `~/.profile`. If you have fish as your default shell, you can work around this by doing the following:

Install [dash](https://www.archlinux.org/packages/?name=dash) and add this line to your `config.fish`:

```
env -i HOME=$HOME dash -l -c printenv | sed -e '/PWD/d; /PATH/s/:/ /g;s/=/ /;s/^/set -x /' | source

```

an alternative variant will save you one executable invocation by using a builtin command:

```
env -i HOME=$HOME dash -l -c 'export -p' | sed -e "/PWD/d; /PATH/s/'//g;/PATH/s/:/ /g;s/=/ /;s/^export/set -x/" | source

```

Also consider [#Not setting fish as default shell](#Not_setting_fish_as_default_shell).

## Tips and Tricks

### History substitution

Fish does not implement history substitution (e.g. `sudo !!`), and the fish developers have said that they [do not plan to](http://fishshell.com/docs/current/faq.html#faq-history). Still, this is an essential piece of many users' workflow. Reddit user, [crossroads1112](http://www.reddit.com/u/crossroads1112), created a function that regains some of the functionality of history substitution and with another syntax. The function is on [github](https://gist.github.com/crossroads1112/77badb2c3455e23b873b) and instructions are included as comments in it. There is a [forked version](https://gist.github.com/b-/981892a65837ab0a387e) that is closer to the original syntax and allows for `command !!` if you specify the command in the helper function.

### Disabling greeting message

By default, fish prints a greeting message at startup. To disable it, add `set fish_greeting` to your fish configuration file.

### Not setting fish as default shell

In Arch, some shell scripts are written for [Bash](/index.php/Bash "Bash") and are not fully compatible with fish. Not setting fish as system wide or user default allows the Bash scripts to run on startup, ensures the environment variables are set correctly, and generally reduces the issues associated with using a non-Bash compatible terminal like fish. You may see some script errors if your default shell is set as fish. Below are several options for using fish without setting it as your default shell.

#### Modify .bashrc to drop into fish

Keep your default shell as Bash and simply add the line `fish && exit` to the appropriate [Bash#Configuration files](/index.php/Bash#Configuration_files "Bash"), such as `.bashrc`. This will allow Bash to properly source `/etc/profile` and all files in `/etc/profile.d`. When you exit *fish* you will seamlessly exit *bash* as well. Compared to the following options, this is the most universal solution, since it works both on a local machine and on an SSH server.

#### Use terminal emulator options

Another option is to open your terminal emulator with a command line option that executes fish. For most terminals this is the `-e` switch, so for example, to open gnome-terminal using fish, change your shortcut to use:

```
gnome-terminal -e fish

```

With LilyTerm and other light terminal emulators that do not support setting the shell it would look like this:

```
SHELL=/usr/bin/fish lilyterm

```

You can also set fish as the default shell for the terminal in the terminal's configuration or for a terminal profile if your terminal emulator has a profiles feature.

Whenever you open your terminal emulator, you will be dropped into fish.

#### Use terminal multiplexer options

To set fish as the shell started in tmux, put this into your `~/.tmux.conf`:

```
set-option -g default-shell "/usr/bin/fish"

```

Whenever you run *tmux*, you will be dropped into fish.

#### Working with fish as default shell

If you decide to set fish as your default shell, you may find that you no longer have very much in your path. You can add a section to your `~/.config/fish/config.fish` file that will set your path correctly on login. This is much like `.profile` or `.bash_profile` as it is only executed for login shells.

```
if status --is-login
        set PATH $PATH /usr/bin /sbin
end

```

Note that this route requires you to manually add various other environment variables, such as `$MOZ_PLUGIN_PATH`. It is a huge amount of work to get a seamless experience with fish as your default shell using this method. A better idea would be to [source /etc/profile and ~/.profile](#.2Fetc.2Fprofile_and_.7E.2F.profile_compatibility).

### su launching Bash

If *su* starts with Bash (because Bash is the default shell), define a function in your fish configuration file:

```
function su
    /bin/su --shell=/usr/bin/fish $argv
end

```

### Start X at login

Add the following to the bottom of your `~/.config/fish/config.fish`.

```
# start X at login
if status --is-login
    if test -z "$DISPLAY" -a $XDG_VTNR -eq 1
        exec startx -- -keeptty
    end
end

```

### Liquidprompt

[Liquidprompt](https://github.com/nojhan/liquidprompt) is a popular "full-featured & carefully designed adaptive prompt for Bash & Zsh" and has no plans to make it compatible with fish [[1]](https://github.com/nojhan/liquidprompt/pull/230). [This project](https://github.com/wesbarnett/fish-lp) implements it for fish.

**Note:** See [this issue](https://github.com/fish-shell/fish-shell/issues/1772) for reasons why `startx` requires the `-keeptty` flag when using fish.

### Git status in prompt

If you would like fish to display the branch and dirty status when you are in a git directory, you can add the following to your `~/.config/fish/config.fish`:

```
# fish git prompt
set __fish_git_prompt_showdirtystate 'yes'
set __fish_git_prompt_showstashstate 'yes'
set __fish_git_prompt_showupstream 'yes'
set __fish_git_prompt_color_branch yellow

# Status Chars
set __fish_git_prompt_char_dirtystate '⚡'
set __fish_git_prompt_char_stagedstate '→'
set __fish_git_prompt_char_stashstate '↩'
set __fish_git_prompt_char_upstream_ahead '↑'
set __fish_git_prompt_char_upstream_behind '↓'

function fish_prompt
        set last_status $status
        set_color $fish_color_cwd
        printf '%s' (prompt_pwd)
        set_color normal
        printf '%s ' (__fish_git_prompt)
       set_color normal
end

```

### Evaluating ssh-agent

In fish, `eval (ssh-agent)` generate errors due to how variables are set. To work around this, use the csh-style option `-c`:

```
 $ eval (ssh-agent -c)

```

## See also

*   [http://fishshell.com/](http://fishshell.com/) - Home page
*   [http://fishshell.com/docs/current/index.html](http://fishshell.com/docs/current/index.html) - Documentation