This article covers the installation and configuration of Arch Linux on a Lenovo T460s laptop.

## Contents

*   [1 Model Description](#Model_Description)
    *   [1.1 Support](#Support)
*   [2 Troubleshooting](#Troubleshooting)
    *   [2.1 Touchpad](#Touchpad)
    *   [2.2 Suspend / Resume](#Suspend_.2F_Resume)
    *   [2.3 Hibernate / Resume](#Hibernate_.2F_Resume)
    *   [2.4 Fingerprint Sensor](#Fingerprint_Sensor)
    *   [2.5 ALSA Beep](#ALSA_Beep)
*   [3 Youtube](#Youtube)

## Model Description

Lenovo ThinkPad T460s aka model 20F9-CTO1WW

### Support

| **Device** | **Working** |
| [Intel graphics](/index.php/Intel_graphics "Intel graphics") | Yes |
| [Wireless network configuration](/index.php/Wireless_network_configuration "Wireless network configuration") | Yes |
| [ALSA](/index.php/ALSA "ALSA") | no beep |
| [Touchpad](/index.php/Touchpad "Touchpad") | kernel patch |
| Trackpad | Yes |
| [Webcam](/index.php/Webcam "Webcam") | Yes |
| Fingerprint Sensor | No |
| Mobile Broadband | Yes |
| Bluetooth | Yes |
| Suspend/Resume | kernel patch |
| Hibernate/Resume | without charger |

## Troubleshooting

The [linux-t460s](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/linux-t460s/) package includes kernel patches that fix the mouse and suspend issues described below, which can be useful until [linux](https://www.archlinux.org/packages/?name=linux) includes these patches.

### Touchpad

There is an open [kernel bug](https://bugzilla.kernel.org/show_bug.cgi?id=114321) which causes the physical mouse button (belonging to the TrackPoint) to report release events immediately even when pressing and holding the button. This prevents drag and drop and similar actions from working. The patch provided in that thread fixes the issue.

### Suspend / Resume

Suspending the T460s by closing the lid when running on battery causes the machine to freeze up entirely. This can be worked around by setting the "intel_pstate=no_hwp" kernel parameter or by compiling the kernel with the patch attached to the [kernel bug](https://bugzilla.kernel.org/show_bug.cgi?id=113551) tracking this issue.

### Hibernate / Resume

The kernel patch for fixing suspend resume (see above) causes hibernation resume to fail when on charger power. The workaround is to unplug the charger when resuming from hibernation.

### Fingerprint Sensor

The fingerprint sensor built into the T460s is currently not supported by [Fprint](/index.php/Fprint "Fprint").

### ALSA Beep

There is no "beep" input to the snd_hda_intel device, so beeps generated by terminal emulators etc. are not played. As a workaround, PulseAudio can be configured to pick up X11 bell events, see [PulseAudio#X11 Bell Events](/index.php/PulseAudio#X11_Bell_Events "PulseAudio").

## Youtube

[Dual boot install with bootctl](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fnYZAr-BaK0&list=PLiKgVPlhUNuxgKwoVH4MMUy5MLqjAE2ux&index=3)